---
layout: post
title: A tactic for EU4 and deriving its optima
date: 2020-07-09
comments: true
external-url:
categories: Misc
---

Two ways to defeat large armies in EU4 is to have better modifiers such as discipline, morale, etc, or to concentrate your forces on their dispersed (but in total larger) forces. This is what Frederick the Great gained acclaim for with his Prussian army utilizing oblique order, particularly effective during the Silesian Wars. 

We can do something similar on an operational level in EU4. If  my army consists of 60K troops and the opponent moves their arbitrarily larger army in stacks of 50K, *ceteris paribus* I must concentrate my whole army on one of their stacks. 

The main issue is that another large stacks might join in and win the opponent the battle. To counter this, it is often good to create a detachment that is intended to be eliminated, but can hold up the entering
army for long enough that you can score a defeat in the main army. Let's derive the optimal size of that detachment, so that you minimize your total casualties while winning the battle. EU4 battles are largely 
influenced by random dice roles, so this will be an exercise in probability and minimizing risk.

The variables representing the sizes of different units are: Our army $A$; our main detachment $A_m$; the enemy army $B_1$ we fight with $A_m$; the detachment $A_d$ that will fight and delay another large enemy army $B_2$
(note $A_m + A_d = A$ and $A_m \geq A_d$), and the time $T$ it will take $B_2$ to reach $B_1$ without our delay. We will assume for now that modifiers (terrain bonuses, discipline, general stats etc.)
are the same but will derive a larger, clunkier formula for it in the end. 

An army retreats, or is potentially "stack wiped" when it's morale depletes to 0. A damage $D_F$ is done to friendly morale each day and $D_E$ done to the enemy's each day. These values are calculated every
3 days with the (now simplified) [formula](https://eu4.paradoxwikis.com/Land_warfare#Combat_sequence): $$ D = D_{roll} + U_{atk} - U_{Made} $$

We will assume $D_{roll}$ is sampled from a [discrete uniform distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_uniform_distribution) over [0,9]: $D_{roll} \sim F(0, 9)$ 

The optimization problem here is that the larger $A_d$ is, the longer and more likely they will delay the enemy troops, but we also want $A - A_d$ to be as large as possible to maximize the chance of success in 
the main battle.

Our worse case scenario is the enemy rolls 9's sequentially. The probability of this happening for the whole battle is 
